Boom.

Nicely said Lou. And with that gem of a sentence I believe you just elegantly answered your own question! 

That is, implicitly, the relationship you were looking for in your original question and what makes Return On Equity useful.

Say a business pays out 100% of its profits as dividends and makes a 30% return on equity. Now assume you are able to buy that equity at its original value (called book value). You would be getting an amazing 30% return on your money!

But what if the same business was listed on the open market and people are able to bid against each other for that equity. Is it reasonable to assume investors might pay more than the book value if the return is that high? Say the investors bidding would be happy with a 10% return rather than a 30% return, how much would they have to bid the equity up to get a 10% return?

Obviously they would have to bid the equity to 3 times its original value to turn the 30% return into a 10% return for them. 

So there is an intrinsic link between the Return On Equity and the price someone will pay for it.

Just like you stated above you have to measure the return against the price you pay.

If the ROE was 40% you could pay 4x the equity to achieve a 10 % return. 20% would be 2x the equity. And so on.

Mathematically the relationship can be expressed:

ROE / 'RETURN YOU WANT' * EQUITY = VALUE
or
30% / 10% = 3 * EQUITY = VALUE

Basically, you can work out how much you would be prepared to pay for the equity, by looking at the return it generates, and comparing that to the return you want. 

You can also see what assumptions about future returns are built into a share price already by looking at the return on equity and the multiple of equity it trades at. (Is it trading above, below, or equal, to the book value of its equity? and what does that say about what the market thinks its future returns will be?).

The maths gets a little bit trickier when the funds are compounded internally (i.e. reinvested not paid out as a dividend). 

Ideally you want to buy a business that can reinvest the excess cash it generates and compound it at high rates of return on the incremental equity (retained earnings). You also want to buy the current equity of such a business as cheaply as possible; not an easy opportunity to find by any stretch of the imagination. You will notice that businesses with a track record of reinvesting funds at the very high rates of return also trade at the biggest premiums to the book value of their equity.

Obviously you have to make incredibly difficult assumptions about the sustainability (or not) of the returns that may be generated in the future for your valuation to be correct. And that, of course, is the really hard part. 

You shouldn't just extrapolate past results out into the future without an understanding of why those returns are likely. That means understanding the underlying business and its competitive position. Which is incredible hard to do and be correct. This difficulty and uncertainty is why many investors (notably very famous, successful ones) insist on a "margin of safety" as a buffer in case they are wrong.

Another way of thinking about Return on Equity is that it is a measure of the 'underlying economics of the business.' The Market Value of the equity is simply what people will pay for the underlying economics.

The reason that comparing the price paid for equity to the return on equity is better than comparing the price to earnings, is because it gets closer to the core economics and how efficiently the assets are being used. This is particularly useful when assessing the benefit of future growth opportunities. PE ratios do not tell you anything about how much money had to be injected in the past to create the current stream of cashflows which is a huge disadvantage.
